docs: changefeed supports to sink to cloud storage (s3) (#13771)
pingcap/docs: tidb-cloud/changefeed-sink-to-cloud-storage.md

---
title: Sink to Cloud Storage
Summary: Learn how to create a changefeed to stream data from a TiDB Dedicated cluster to cloud storage, such as Amazon S3 etc.
---

# Sink to Cloud Storage

This document describes how to stream data from a TiDB Dedicated cluster to cloud storage, such as Amazon S3 etc.

> ## Limitations
> 

> > - To use the Changefeed feature, please ensure that your TiDB cluster is running version v6.5.0 or a later version.

Reviewer: Sync CDC team, we only support sink to S3 on cloud with version >= 7.1.0 since data folder structure has incompatible changes to lower versions.

> > - To use the Changefeed feature, please ensure that your TiDB cluster is running version v6.5.0 or a later version.

Author: ```suggestion
> - To use the Changefeed feature, please ensure that your TiDB cluster is running version v7.1.0 or a later version.
```

> 
> > ## Limitations
> > 
> > - To use the Changefeed feature, please ensure that your TiDB cluster is running version v7.1.0 or a later version.
> > - Each dedicated cluster supports the creation of up to 5 changefeeds.
> > - As TiDB Cloud utilizes TiCDC for establishing changefeeds, it inherits the > identical [limitations of TiCDC](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-overview#unsupported-scenarios).
> > - Replicating data without a primary key or a non-null unique key constraint poses the risk of data redundancy, especially in certain retry scenarios where statements like INSERT and REPLACE are not reentrant.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Limitations

- To use Changefeed, ensure that your TiDB cluster is running version v7.1.0 or a later version.
- For each TiDB Cloud cluster, you can create up to 5 changefeeds.
- Because TiDB Cloud uses TiCDC to establish changefeeds, it has the same [restrictions as TiCDC](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-overview#unsupported-scenarios).
- Replicating data without a primary key or a non-null unique key constraint poses the risk of data redundancy, especially in certain retry scenarios where statements like `INSERT` and `REPLACE` are not reentrant.
```

    - **Tables with valid keys**: This column displays the tables that have valid keys, including primary keys or unique indexes.
    - **Tables without valid keys**: This column shows tables that lack primary keys or unique keys. These tables present a challenge during replication because the absence of a unique identifier can result in inconsistent data when handling duplicate events downstream. To ensure data consistency, it is recommended to add unique keys or primary keys to these tables before initiating replication. Alternatively, you can employ filter rules to exclude these tables. For example, you can exclude the table `test.tbl1` by using the rule "!test.tbl1".

5. In the **Start Replication Position** area, select one of the following replication positions:
    - Start replication from now on
    - Start replication from a specific [TSO](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/glossary#tso)
    - Start replication from a specific time

6. In the **Data Format** area, select either the `CSV` or `Canal-JSON` format.

> <SimpleTab>
> <div label="Configure CSV Format">
> To configure the `CSV` format:
> 
> ![the data format of CSV](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-s3-02-data-format-csv-conf.jpg)
> 
> - **Data Separator**: To rotate data based on the year, month, and day, or choose not to rotate at all.
> - **Delimiter**: Specify the character used to separate values in the CSV file. The comma (,) is the most commonly used delimiter.
> - **Quote**: Specify the character used to enclose values that contain the delimiter character or special characters. Typically, double quotes (") are used as the quote character.
> - **Null/Empty Values**: Specify how null or empty values are represented in the CSV file. This can be important for proper handling and interpretation of the data.
> - **Include Commit Ts**
> 
> </div>
> <div label="Configure Canal-JSON Format">
> Canal-JSON is a plain JSON text format, to configure it: 
> 
> ![the data format of Canal-JSON](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-s3-02-data-format-canal-json.jpg)
> 
> - **Data Separator**: To rotate data based on the year, month, and day, or choose not to rotate at all.
> - **Enable TiDB Extention** 
> 
> </div>
> </SimpleTab>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <SimpleTab>
    <div label="Configure CSV Format">
    To configure the `CSV` format:
    
    ![the data format of CSV](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-s3-02-data-format-csv-conf.jpg)
    
    - **Data Separator**: To rotate data based on the year, month, and day, or choose not to rotate at all.
    - **Delimiter**: Specify the character used to separate values in the CSV file. The comma (,) is the most commonly used delimiter.
    - **Quote**: Specify the character used to enclose values that contain the delimiter character or special characters. Typically, double quotes (") are used as the quote character.
    - **Null/Empty Values**: Specify how null or empty values are represented in the CSV file. This can be important for proper handling and interpretation of the data.
    - **Include Commit Ts**
    
    </div>
    <div label="Configure Canal-JSON Format">
    Canal-JSON is a plain JSON text format, to configure it: 
    
    ![the data format of Canal-JSON](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-s3-02-data-format-canal-json.jpg)
    
    - **Data Separator**: To rotate data based on the year, month, and day, or choose not to rotate at all.
    - **Enable TiDB Extention** 
    
    </div>
    </SimpleTab>
```

---
title: Sink to Cloud Storage
Summary: Learn how to create a changefeed to stream data from a TiDB Dedicated cluster to cloud storage, such as Amazon S3 etc.
---

# Sink to Cloud Storage

> This document describes how to create a changefeed to stream data from TiDB Cloud to cloud storage, such as Amazon S3.

Author: LGTM

> **Note:**
>

> > To stream data to cloud storage, make sure that your TiDB cluster version is v7.1.0 or later.

Author: ```suggestion
> To stream data to cloud storage, make sure that your TiDB cluster version is v7.1.0 or later.  If you want to upgrade cluster to v7.1.0 or higher, [contact PingCAP](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v5.2/mailto:info@pingcap.com) for support.
```

Reviewer 3: @benmaoer https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v5.2/mailto:info@pingcap.com is 404. Please update the link

>
> For [TiDB Serverless](/tidb-cloud/select-cluster-tier.md#tidb-serverless-beta) clusters, the changefeed feature is unavailable.

## Restrictions

- For each TiDB Cloud cluster, you can create up to 5 changefeeds.
- Because TiDB Cloud uses TiCDC to establish changefeeds, it has the same [restrictions as TiCDC](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-overview#unsupported-scenarios).
- If the table to be replicated does not have a primary key or a non-null unique index, the absence of a unique constraint during replication could result in duplicated data being inserted downstream in some retry scenarios.

## Create a changefeed

1. Navigate to the cluster overview page of the target TiDB cluster, and then click **Changefeed** in the left navigation pane.

2. Click **Create Changefeed**, and select **Amazon S3** as the destination.

3. Fill in the fields in the **S3 Endpoint** area: `S3 URI`, `Access Key ID` and  `Secret Access Key`.

    ![create changefeed to sink to s3](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-s3-01-create-changefeed.jpg)

> 4. Click **Next** to establish the connection from the dedicated TiDB cluster to Amazaon S3, then test and verify if the connection is successful.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Click **Next** to establish the connection from the TiDB Dedicated cluster to Amazaon S3. TiDB Cloud will automatically test and verify if the connection is successful.
```

    - If yes, you are directed to the next step of configuration.
    - If not, a connectivity error is displayed, and you need to handle the error. After the error is resolved, click **Next** again.

5. Customize **Table Filter** to filter the tables that you want to replicate. For the rule syntax, refer to [table filter rules](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-filter#changefeed-log-filters).

> 
>     ![the table filter of changefeed](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-s3-02-table-filter.jpg)
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer 3: Since the console UI of TiDB Cloud changes frequently, continually updating the screenshots in our documentation becomes time-consuming. The "Create Changefeed" UI design is self-explanatory and it's easy for users to follow even without screenshots. So, we recommend removing screenshots in this document to simplify maintenance.

    - **Tables with valid keys**: this column displays the tables that have valid keys, including primary keys or unique indexes.
    - **Tables without valid keys**: This column shows tables that lack primary keys or unique keys. These tables present a challenge during replication because the absence of a unique identifier can result in inconsistent data when handling duplicate events downstream. To ensure data consistency, it is recommended to add unique keys or primary keys to these tables before initiating the replication. Alternatively, you can employ filter rules to exclude these tables. For example, you can exclude the table `test.tbl1` by using the rule `"!test.tbl1"`.

6. In the **Start Replication Position** area, select one of the following replication positions:

    - Start replication from now on
    - Start replication from a specific [TSO](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/glossary#tso)
    - Start replication from a specific time

7. In the **Data Format** area, select either the `CSV` or `Canal-JSON` format.

    <SimpleTab>
    <div label="Configure CSV Format">

    To configure the `CSV` format, fill in the following fields:

> 
>     ![the data format of CSV](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-s3-02-data-format-csv-conf.jpg)
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

    - **Date Separator**: To rotate data based on the year, month, and day, or choose not to rotate at all.
    - **Delimiter**: Specify the character used to separate values in the CSV file. The comma (`,`) is the most commonly used delimiter.
    - **Quote**: Specify the character used to enclose values that contain the delimiter character or special characters. Typically, double quotes (`"`) are used as the quote character.

>     - **Null/Empty Values**: Specify how null or empty values are represented in the CSV file. This can be important for proper handling and interpretation of the data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - **Null/Empty Values**: Specify how null or empty values are represented in the CSV file. This is important for proper handling and interpretation of the data.
```

>     - **Include Commit Ts**

Reviewer 2: 这里能否解释下开启 include commit ts 后的行为？

Author: @cchenkey 辛苦解释下这个参数?

Reviewer 4: include_commit_ts：是否在 CSV 行中包含 commit-ts。

>     - **Include Commit Ts**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - **Include Commit Ts**: Controls whether to include commit-ts in CSV rows.
```

    </div>
    <div label="Configure Canal-JSON Format">

    Canal-JSON is a plain JSON text format. To configure it, fill in the following fields:

> 
>     ![the data format of Canal-JSON](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-s3-02-data-format-canal-json.jpg)
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

>     - **Include Commit Ts**: Whether to include [`commit-ts`](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage#replicate-change-data-to-storage-services) in the CSV row. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - **Include Commit Ts**: Control whether to include [`commit-ts`](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage#replicate-change-data-to-storage-services) in the CSV row. 
```

>     - **Include Commit Ts**: Control whether to include [`commit-ts`](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage#replicate-change-data-to-storage-services) in the CSV row. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - **Include Commit Ts**: Control whether to include [`commit-ts`](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage#replicate-change-data-to-storage-services) in the CSV row.
```

    - **Date Separator**: To rotate data based on the year, month, and day, or choose not to rotate at all.

>     - **Enable TiDB Extension**

Reviewer 2: 这里也请解释下什么是 TiDB Extension 和开启后的行为

Author: @cchenkey cchenkey, 请帮忙补充下

Reviewer 4: TiDB Extension：protocol 参数为 canal-json 时，如果该值为 true，TiCDC 会发送 WATERMARK 事件，并在 canal-json 消息中添加 [TiDB 扩展字段
https://docs.pingcap.com/zh/tidb/stable/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage#%E9%85%8D%E7%BD%AE-sink-uri

>     - **Enable TiDB Extension**

Author: ```suggestion
    - **Enable TiDB Extension**: When protocol is set to canal-json and enable-tidb-extension is set to true, TiCDC sends [WATERMARK events](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-canal-json#watermark-event) and adds the [TiDB extension field](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-canal-json#tidb-extension-field) to Canal-JSON messages.
```

>     - **Enable TiDB Extension**: When you enable this option, TiDB Cloud changefeed sends [WATERMARK events](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-canal-json#watermark-event) and adds the [TiDB extension field](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-canal-json#tidb-extension-field) to Canal-JSON messages.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - **Enable TiDB Extension**: When you enable this option, TiCDC sends [WATERMARK events](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-canal-json#watermark-event) and adds the [TiDB extension field](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-canal-json#tidb-extension-field) to Canal-JSON messages.
```

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/pingcap/docs/pull/13771#discussion_r1226399966

>     - **Enable TiDB Extension**: When protocol is set to canal-json and enable-tidb-extension is set to true, TiCDC sends [WATERMARK events](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-canal-json#watermark-event) and adds the [TiDB extension field](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-canal-json#tidb-extension-field) to Canal-JSON messages.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - **Enable TiDB Extension**: When you enable this option, TiCDC sends [WATERMARK events](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-canal-json#watermark-event) and adds the [TiDB extension field](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-canal-json#tidb-extension-field) to Canal-JSON messages.
```

Author: 只对 Canal-json 协议生效

    </div>
    </SimpleTab>

8. Click **Next** to configure your changefeed specification.

>     - In the **Changefeed Specification** area, specify the number of replication capacity units (RCUs) to be used by the changefeed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - In the **Changefeed Specification** area, specify the number of Replication Capacity Units (RCUs) to be used by the changefeed.
```

    - In the **Changefeed Name** area, specify a name for the changefeed.

9. Click **Next** to review the changefeed configuration.

    - If you have verified that all configurations are correct, click **Create** to proceed with the creation of the changefeed.

    - If you need to modify any configurations, click **Previous** to go back and make the necessary changes.

10. The sink will start shortly, and you will observe the status of the sink changing from **Creating** to **Running**.

> 11. Click on the name of the changefeed, and you will be able to view additional details about the changefeed. This includes information such as the checkpoint status, replication latency, and other relevant metrics associated with the changefeed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
11. Click the name of the changefeed to go to its details page. On this page, you can view more information about the changefeed, including the checkpoint status, replication latency, and other relevant metrics.
```
